README.md, before:

# Legalian - Take Home - Graph API

A simple Graph API built with **FastAPI** that allows you to create nodes and edges to explore
relationships between nodes in a graph. The service runs using **Docker Compose** and uses
**MySQL** as its database.

## Architecture

This service is implemented as a layered **FastAPI** application, designed to clearly separate
**HTTP concerns, business logic, and persistence**. The architecture prioritizes readability,
testability, and maintainability while remaining intentionally simple for an MVP-sized system.

The codebase is organized into the following layers:

- **API layer** (`api/`): Defines HTTP routes and contains no business logic and delegates all work to the service layer.
- **Service layer** (`services/`): Encapsulates application and domain logic, including validation and orchestration.
- **Repository layer** (`repositories/`): Responsible for all database interactions and persistence logic.
- **Models** (`models/`): SQLAlchemy ORM models representing database tables.
- **Schemas** (`schemas/`): Pydantic models used for request validation and response serialization.
- **Core** (`core/`): Application configuration, database setup and exception definitions.

#### Graph Traversal
Graph traversal is implemented using a recursive Common Table Expression (CTE) in MySQL,
enabling deep connectivity queries to be executed in a single database query.

#### Error Handling
Validation errors are handled through Pydantic schemas, domain-specific exceptions are raised in the
service layer and translated into appropriate HTTP responses using FastAPI exception handlers.

---

### Design Trade-offs
#### Asyncio
Asynchronous operations were not implemented, as they were considered outside the scope of this project.

## Running the Project with Docker

### Requirements

* Docker
* Docker Compose Plugin

### Start the Services

The example Docker Compose file can be found at `docker-compose.example.yml`.
Run the following command from the project root:

```shell
docker compose -f docker-compose.example.yml up -d
```

This will start:

* A MySQL database instance
* The FastAPI application

---

### Environment Variables

The application can be configured using the following environment variables:

| Variable          | Description                                               | Default     |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| `PORT`            | FastAPI server port                                       | 8000        |
| `APP_NAME`        | FastAPI application title                                 | Legalian... |
| `APP_DEBUG_MODE`  | Enable/disable FastAPI debug mode and Swagger & Redoc UIs | False       |
| `APP_DB_HOST`     | Database host                                             | localhost   |
| `APP_DB_PORT`     | Database port                                             | 3306        |
| `APP_DB_USER`     | Database user                                             | root        |
| `APP_DB_PASSWORD` | Database password                                         | 1234        |
| `APP_DB_NAME`     | Database name                                             | graph_db    |

### API Documentation

Once running, you can access the interactive API documentation at:

- http://localhost:8000/docs
- http://localhost:8000/redoc

## API Endpoint

### Get Connected Nodes

```http
GET /nodes/{node_id}/connected
```

**Description:**
Returns all nodes reachable from the given node, including the node itself.

**Example:**

```http
GET http://localhost:8000/nodes/1/connected
```

## Graph API – Verifying The Connectivity

### 1. Verify the Database & API Are Running

To confirm that the MySQL database and the API are up and running, execute the following `cURL` command:
```shell
curl -X 'GET' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/graph' -H 'accept: application/json'
```

#### Expected Response
Since the graph has just been created and contains no data yet, you should receive:
```json
{
  "nodes":[],
  "edges":[]
}
```

---

### 2. Seed the Graph with Sample Data

Next, initialize the graph with a predefined state by running the following command:

```shell
curl -X 'POST' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/graph/seed' -H 'accept: application/json'
```
This will populate the graph with a known set of nodes and edges for testing and development.

---

### 3. Query Connected Nodes

To retrieve all nodes reachable from the node with `id = 1`, execute:

```shell
curl -X 'GET' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/nodes/1/connected' -H 'accept: application/json'
```

#### Expected Response
Since the graph has been seeded with sample data, you should receive:
```json
[
  {"id":1},
  {"id":2},
  {"id":3},
  {"id":5},
  {"id":6},
  {"id":4},
  {"id":7},
  {"id":8},
  {"id":9},
  {"id":13},
  {"id":11},
  {"id":14},
  {"id":15},
  {"id":16},
  {"id":10},
  {"id":12}
]
```

Commit message:

Removed boilerplate docs and updated README

README.md, after:

# Legalian - Take Home - Graph API

A simple Graph API built with **FastAPI** that allows you to create nodes and edges to explore
relationships between nodes in a graph. The service runs using **Docker Compose** and uses
**MySQL** as its database.

## Architecture

This service is implemented as a layered **FastAPI** application, designed to clearly separate
**HTTP concerns, business logic, and persistence**. The architecture prioritizes readability,
testability, and maintainability while remaining intentionally simple for an MVP-sized system.

The codebase is organized into the following layers:

- **API layer** (`api/`): Defines HTTP routes and contains no business logic and delegates all work to the service layer.
- **Service layer** (`services/`): Encapsulates application and domain logic, including validation and orchestration.
- **Repository layer** (`repositories/`): Responsible for all database interactions and persistence logic.
- **Models** (`models/`): SQLAlchemy ORM models representing database tables.
- **Schemas** (`schemas/`): Pydantic models used for request validation and response serialization.
- **Core** (`core/`): Application configuration, database setup and exception definitions.

#### Graph Traversal
Graph traversal is implemented using a recursive Common Table Expression (CTE) in MySQL,
enabling deep connectivity queries to be executed in a single database query.

#### Error Handling
Validation errors are handled through Pydantic schemas, domain-specific exceptions are raised in the
service layer and translated into appropriate HTTP responses using FastAPI exception handlers.

---

### Design Trade-offs
#### Clear Layered Architecture
A clear API–service–repository separation was preferred since it improves testability, readability,
and scalability for larger codebases, even though it introduces additional boilerplate.

---

#### Explicit Error Handling
Resource existence is explicitly validated in the service layer instead of relying on database
constraint errors. This improves error clarity and API behavior at the cost of additional queries.

---

#### Bulk Operations
Bulk operations were preferred over single-resource endpoints to keep the API surface
minimal and support more efficient graph updates with singular queries.

---

#### Atomic Operations
Atomic graph operations were preferred since graph consistency was prioritized over partial
success, ensuring the system is never left in an intermediate or invalid state. The tradeoff
is reduced flexibility, as all errors must be resolved before requests.

---

#### Asyncio
The API uses synchronous SQLAlchemy sessions instead of async sessions. This simplifies
transaction handling for a take-home project, at the cost of reduced concurrency under load.

## Running the Project with Docker

### Requirements

* Docker
* Docker Compose Plugin

### Start the Services

The example Docker Compose file can be found at `docker-compose.example.yml`.
Run the following command from the project root:

```shell
docker compose -f docker-compose.example.yml up -d
```

This will start:

* A MySQL database instance
* The FastAPI application

---

### Environment Variables

The application can be configured using the following environment variables:

| Variable          | Description                                               | Default     |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| `PORT`            | FastAPI server port                                       | 8000        |
| `APP_NAME`        | FastAPI application title                                 | Legalian... |
| `APP_DEBUG_MODE`  | Enable/disable FastAPI debug mode and Swagger & Redoc UIs | False       |
| `APP_DB_HOST`     | Database host                                             | localhost   |
| `APP_DB_PORT`     | Database port                                             | 3306        |
| `APP_DB_USER`     | Database user                                             | root        |
| `APP_DB_PASSWORD` | Database password                                         | 1234        |
| `APP_DB_NAME`     | Database name                                             | graph_db    |

### API Documentation

Once running, you can access the interactive API documentation at:

- http://localhost:8000/docs
- http://localhost:8000/redoc

## API Endpoint

### Get Connected Nodes

```http
GET /nodes/{node_id}/connected
```

**Description:**
Returns all nodes reachable from the given node, including the node itself.

**Example:**

```http
GET http://localhost:8000/nodes/1/connected
```

## Graph API – Verifying The Connectivity

### 1. Verify the Database & API Are Running

To confirm that the MySQL database and the API are up and running, execute the following `cURL` command:
```shell
curl -X 'GET' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/graph' -H 'accept: application/json'
```

#### Expected Response
Since the graph has just been created and contains no data yet, you should receive:
```json
{
  "nodes":[],
  "edges":[]
}
```

---

### 2. Seed the Graph with Sample Data

Next, initialize the graph with a predefined state by running the following command:

```shell
curl -X 'POST' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/graph/seed' -H 'accept: application/json'
```
This will populate the graph with a known set of nodes and edges for testing and development.

---

### 3. Query Connected Nodes

To retrieve all nodes reachable from the node with `id = 1`, execute:

```shell
curl -X 'GET' 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/nodes/1/connected' -H 'accept: application/json'
```

#### Expected Response
Since the graph has been seeded with sample data, you should receive:
```json
[
  {"id":1},
  {"id":2},
  {"id":3},
  {"id":5},
  {"id":6},
  {"id":4},
  {"id":7},
  {"id":8},
  {"id":9},
  {"id":13},
  {"id":11},
  {"id":14},
  {"id":15},
  {"id":16},
  {"id":10},
  {"id":12}
]
```
